---
layout: blog_post
title: Tips on Research
description: List of research tips for grad students collected mostly from personal experience.
date: July 22nd, 2022
---

Intro

## Coming up with Ideas

- Work on what you believe to be the most important problem.

  Rated problems by a combination of novelty, usefulness, and practicality. 

- Be attached to problems, less attached on assumptions, and less attached to solutions.

- Combat paralysis by first believing that progress in the field is guaranteed, then work backwards from there.

  By paralysis I mean the feeling that there is nothing to be done with a given problem.

  Of course actual progress is not guaranteed, but it's hard to make progress without first believing that there is progress to be made.

- Incremental work is fine as long as they bring about new understandings. 
    
  It's also a great way to build confidence and learn about a field. Nothing beats personal "on-policy" experience of trying to solve a problem.

- Most ideas are bad ideas. Don't be stingy with ideas.

- Test and discard new ideas quickly but carefully.

  You should figure out and record what constraints or assumptions prevented them from working. This is useful in case these conditions change in the future.

- Don't be afraid to make ideas concrete.
  
  It's easier to show how concrete ideas don't work as opposed to abstract ideas, so sometimes we might be reluctant to make ideas concrete in fear of discovering that they don't work. It's important to not procrastinate on this to make real progress.
  
- Just because a toy problem can be interpolated into the actual problem doesn't mean the toy solution can be interpolated into the actual solution.

  In other words, take care when designing the toy problem to make sure its experiments, solutions, and insights can be transferred to the real problem. 

## Staying Productive

- Trust your future self.

  Working on long-term projects with many parts can feel overwhelming. Trusting that your future self can fulfill their parts allow you to focus on the task at hand and not feel too stressed about all the things you have to do in the future.

- Be intentional about exploration.

  In research it's very easy to meander about in a "sea" of ideas and come out the other side without getting anything done. To avoid this we should be aware of when we're exploring ideas and document the process as we go.

- Group efforts are more effective for implementation than exploration.

  The former has clear objectives that everyone is aware of, so people don't have to communicate and coordinate with each other as much. 

  The latter also typically requires fast iterations and series of small experiments, which can be executed much faster with a small number of people.  

## Preparing Presentations

- prepare content via layers of greater resolution, not sequentially 
- Use the 3 R's when making slides: Reduce, Reuse, Recycle
- Directly explain points of confusion

## Staying Positive

- Spend less time on "it won't work b/c" and more on "it might work if you do this"
- Don't compare your day-to-day with an aggregate of everyone's best days
- Just b/c something feels easy to you doesn't mean it's easy to everyone

## General Practice

- Have a list of problems

- Have a long term research and application vision

- Seek new works not necessarily for implementation but for new ways of thinking

- Write useful reviews - don't make judgements based on tangential assumptions

- Strength of belief only weakly correlates with validity of such belief

- Do pre-mortems.

  Imagine the current project fails in the future and list out reasons that explain its failure. Then try to avoid these reasons.

## Conclusion
